---
date: 2014-04-21
categories:
  - practices
  - teamwork
---

# Team Uncommunication

_The art of silence_

Last year, my friends and I spent a few days by a lake on Vancouver Island. The
house we were renting came with two canoes and, naturally, one of my friends
and I ended up paddling one. Being quite new to canoes, we were at first
struggling to keep the thing straight and move swiftly.

<!-- more -->

<figure markdown>
![structure of a canoe](canoe.png)
<figcaption>Canoe, picture by oldtowncanoe.com</figcaption>
</figure>

Why? Because we tried to communicate it wrong. We started off by giving each
other infrequent commands and doing what felt right. Net result? We were almost
spinning around. Then we decided to go for the “leadership model” where the one
on the stern seat ("stroke") orchestrates. That was a little better, but it was
still frustrating as hell.

What helped us and ultimately brought joy to the experience was a simple idea
of a steering agreement. As opposed to a kayak paddle, a canoe paddle only
allows you to paddle on one side at a time. We decided to always paddle on
opposites sides (duh!) and whenever either of us was _overpaddling_, the other
person was having a little break. After a few minutes, we were going in a
straight line, having a lot of fun and we didn’t need to _communicate_ our
paddling at all!

---

Why do I still remember this little story? One of the reasons is because it is
so illustrative to the whole "team communication" debate. Over years, I’ve seen
different teams communicate in different ways. The root of the problem seems to
be in the wrong choice of word ("communication"). Many of us have simply
assumed that this is about talking.

But is that a right way to think about it? There is a lot of artifacts brought
to us by this concept. Morning standup meetings with recital of what can be
easily extracted from a _well organized_ scrum board. Relying on in-person
communications and, as a result, building a _no remote people allowed_ culture
that often leads to poor documenting efforts. Leadership struggles. Picking the
right tool for chatting.

What if instead of relying on constant talking, we focus on defining easy to
follow game rules and using technology to facilitate this? Imagine the joy of
being able to stay uninterrupted when you need that most. Imagine the ability
to hire outside of a 50 miles radius. Imagine being able to let new hires
onboard themselves. Imagine shipping ahead of the schedule _(ok, I might have
made that one up :)_.

Establishing this will not be easy and it will require some ongoing
maintenance, but the net benefit will be seriously outweighing the
expenditures. For the moment, I am deliberately not going to make any
_practical suggestions_ on what to do to achieve the zen of __team
uncommunication__. I want this concept to continue roaming free of constraints
for a little while so that we can be as creative and critical as possible. I
choose to stay inquisitive about enabling teamwork the right way. I choose to
stay a newbie.

